
Signs of arthritis
Arthritis is a long-term inflammatory disease that develops gradually and may affect the limbs or the back. The condition worsens over time, and your dog may not show symptoms in the early stages. Some dogs mask their pain and discomfort. Regular vet check-ups help to monitor your dog's health as they age. Our working guide dogs see their vet every six months, rising to every three months when they are eight years old.

If you notice any changes in your dog's behaviour, especially if they're a senior dog, speak to your vet for advice. Don't assume that changes such as slowing down are simply a result of ageing. Symptoms of arthritis to look out for include:

Your dog is less enthusiastic about exercise and reluctant to play.
Your dog has become uncharacteristically grumpy or irritable.
Your dog seems tired and is slowing down.
They show stiffness or lameness, especially after a rest or upon waking.
You notice your dog limping, especially after a walk.
Your dog has become sensitive about being touched at the joints.
You notice a loss of muscle mass in your dog, particularly on the legs and back.
Their symptoms appear worse when the environment is damp or cold.
Your dog has taken to licking or chewing at the joint (you may see saliva stains).
You notice your dog has stopped jumping onto a favourite chair or bed.
Your dog's hesitance to get up and about may lead them to have a toilet accident indoors.
End-stage arthritis in dogs
Dogs can live with arthritis for years if they have the right lifestyle and supportive treatments to keep them comfortable. As a progressive condition, dogs with arthritis in the later stages can show worsening symptoms. Loss of cartilage can make the condition very painful as bone rubs against bone in the joints.

With end-stage arthritis, dogs may show symptoms including:

Much more limited range of movement.
Being restless when standing due to pain and discomfort.
Shifting their weight away from the affected joints.
Eventually becoming unable to walk.
Treatment for arthritis in dogs
See your vet for advice if you have any concerns that your dog might have arthritis. They can do a physical examination to check for stiffness and pain in the joints, assess the range of motion in the joints, and arrange for tests if needed. X-rays may be recommended to confirm the diagnosis and rule out other conditions.

There's no cure for arthritis but your vet will consider treatment options to manage your dog's pain and reduce inflammation. Over time, your dog's needs and treatment plan may change as the condition progresses. They will need regular follow-up veterinary appointments to monitor their condition.


Joint pain relief for dogs
Dogs with arthritis usually need ongoing pain relief medication. This not only makes them more comfortable but enables them to keep active and mobile. Anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) work to reduce pain and inflammation. There can be side effects with long-term use of some of these medicines, especially if there are other kidney or liver health concerns. Your dog will have regular follow-up appointments to monitor their health and side effects. Different types of pain medication may be available if your dog needs them.


Joint supplements for dogs
Joint supplements should only be used as part of an overall treatment plan which is likely to include other drugs; joint supplements are unlikely to be sufficiently beneficial on their own to make a significant difference to pain level.


Weight management and exercise
Weight control is an essential aspect of managing arthritis in your dog. Obesity places greater strain on a dog's joints and can worsen their arthritis. Your vet can advise on weight management and a healthy diet, and you should regularly assess your dog's weight.

Many people worry about whether and how to exercise their dog with arthritis, especially if they seem stiff and uncomfortable. In fact, keeping active is important to promote their range of movement, maintain muscle mass around the joints, and manage their weight.

If your dog has arthritis, they need to keep active, but you may need to adjust their routine. For example, regular shorter walks may be better for them than one very long walk. Being active little and often is better than staying still for long periods, which can lead to stiffness.

Avoid activities that put too much pressure on their joints (like jumping for a ball), and if they're in a lot of pain or discomfort on a particular day, they may need rest instead.

Your vet will be able to advise on the duration and amount of exercise that best suits the stage of your dog’s arthritis.


Injections for arthritis in dogs
There are a range of other treatments that vets may use occasionally. They vary in efficacy and may work differently in different patients. Your vet will advise you of appropriate medications if they're appropriate for your dog.


Natural remedies for arthritis in dogs
As well as veterinary medication, physical therapy such as hydrotherapy and physiotherapy can help support your dog's arthritis. Hydrotherapy is especially good for keeping dogs active and building muscle mass without putting pressure on their joints. It can also assist with weight loss, and warm water can reduce swelling.

Other natural remedies such as acupuncture are sometimes used but these should be in conjunction with medication and under the veterinary surgeon’s advice as to what is the most appropriate treatment plan for your dog’s arthritis stage.

There are many other ways to help a dog with arthritis by making small adjustments to their care:

Protect your dog from the cold. For example, provide a heat pad on cold days and dry your dog after a wet walk or wash.
If your home has smooth flooring the dog has to walk on, look at adding rugs or anti-slip mats to increase friction and prevent them from slipping.
Give them a comfortable, accessible place to sleep. Memory foam beds can be a good choice for dogs with arthritis.
You can get raised bowls to put your dog's food and water in so they don't have to lower their heads and strain their joints when eating and drinking.
Provide a ramp to get in and out of the car.

Surgery for arthritis in dogs
Surgery may be an option with severe arthritis or where medication isn't effective in keeping a dog comfortable. Surgery aims to make your dog more comfortable and improve their quality of life. There are different types of surgery: replacing a joint, joint fusion, and removing part of a joint. Your vet will advise if there is a surgical procedure that may help your dog.

A Golden Retriever facing the camera in an open field with his mouth open and tongue out
What causes arthritis in dogs
Arthritis can develop due to wear and tear on a dog's joints as they age; hence it's more common in older dogs. Other causes of arthritis in dogs include injury, obesity, abnormal development of the cartilage in the joints, and infection.

Some dogs are at increased risk of developing arthritis:

Certain breeds are predisposed to conditions such as hip dysplasia and elbow dysplasia, making them more susceptible to arthritis. Breeds at higher risk include Labradors, German shepherds, golden retrievers, Rottweilers, springer spaniels and Bernese mountain dogs.
Obese dogs can be at higher risk of arthritis because being overweight places extra strain on the joints.
Dogs who experience an injury such as a torn ligament or bone fracture. Damaged cartilage can develop into arthritis.
An infection in the joint can cause inflammation which can lead to arthritis.
Excessive and repeated stress on the joints from high-impact exercise.
How to prevent arthritis in dogs
It's not possible to prevent age-related arthritis, but you can take care of your dog from a young age, and closely monitor their physical health, to help limit the risk of arthritis earlier in life.

When considering a puppy, if you're looking at breeds predisposed to arthritis, it's important to ask for health screening information, including hip scoring, for the parents. If your dog is at increased risk of arthritis, it's a good idea to take them for regular vet check-ups.

Take care with puppies whose joints are still developing. Try to discourage them from jumping, using stairs, skidding and ball-throwing games.

Giving your dog an active lifestyle and keeping them at a healthy weight to prevent obesity is the most important thing you can do to limit the onset and effects of arthritis.

Frequently asked questions

What helps dogs with arthritis?
Dogs with arthritis can live long and active lives with the right support. Keeping your dog the correct weight is by far the most important thing you can do help your dog. Most arthritic dogs need pain relief and anti-inflammatory medications. Other ways to help your dog include keeping them warm, providing a comfortable bed, and making it easier for them to get around at home, for example laying rugs over tiled or smooth floors.


Are dogs with arthritis in pain?
Just as for humans, arthritis is painful for dogs. That's why it can lead to changes in your dog's behaviour, with them being reluctant to do things they may previously have enjoyed, like playing or hopping onto a favourite chair. Various medications can help manage your dog's pain, including non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.


Are walks good for dogs with arthritis?
Keeping your arthritic dog active is generally a good thing. Shorter, more regular walks are better than long ones and can help maintain your dog's muscle mass, aid with weight management, and promote a range of movement. If your dog shows signs of limping after a walk, this could be a sign of overdoing it, and on days when they're particularly stiff or in pain, you may want to give them a break.