Dog health checks at home
A dog health check is giving your canine companion a check-up. This includes examining their eyes, ears, mouth, body, skin, legs, paws, tail, and private areas. By understanding what’s normal for your dog, you can more easily spot when there are changes that should be checked by a vet. It's an essential aspect of dog care that you can perform at home to help ensure your dog stays healthy and happy.

A dog owner gently inspects their dog's paws.

Why are dog health checks important?
Taking care of your dog's health is crucial for their physical and mental wellbeing as well as your peace of mind. Regular check-ups can help to catch any health issues early, leading to more effective treatment and a speedier recovery. Performing these health checks at home also strengthens the bond between you and your dog and helps you to recognise changes in behaviour or appearance that might indicate something is wrong.

It’s important to remember that while health checks can be done at home, if you do notice any changes in your dog’s health, or have any concerns, you should always contact your vet.

Preparing to give your dog a health check
Before you start your dog’s health check be sure to think about the following aspects to ensure a positive and successful experience for your dog.

Build confidence: Begin by getting your dog used to being touched gently all over their body. This builds their confidence, and they'll feel more at ease during their check-ups. If your dog appears uncomfortable, make sure to stop and take a break.
Find a suitable location: Choose a calm, quiet location, preferably on a non-slip surface. Yoga mats, or non-slip rugs, are helpful if you're checking your dog on a tiled or slippery floor.
Encourage positive association: Dogs learn through positive association. Offer rewards during or after health checks so your dog starts to enjoy them. Rewards can be food, praise, or stroking – whatever your dog enjoys most!
Take it slowly: Introduce health checks gradually. Focus on checking different body parts over a couple of weeks, starting with areas they're used to being touched and stopping if your dog seems agitated or uncomfortable.
Be consistent: Always try to perform health checks in the same order, starting at the eyes and ending at their bottom. Performing checks in the same order will help your dog know what to expect during their health check, whether at home or with their vet, and is also more hygienic and reduces the risk of infection.
A dog owner strokes his dog as they sit on the floor of their home.
How to perform a health check at home
You should always start at your dog's eyes and head, often considered the "clean end", and work your way down to their bottom, sometimes referred to as the "dirty end".

During a health check, if you spot anything that doesn't look or feel right, don't hesitate to contact your vet.


Head and face
Check your dog's face for symmetry – both sides should look the same, with no drooping. Make sure their head is straight without tilting to one side.

Eyes
Examine their eyes; the pupils should match in size and shape, and the whites of their eyes should be white, not yellow, red, or speckled. Check for any excess watering of the eye, yellow or green discharge, or cloudiness. If your dog does have a problem with their eyes they may also blink excessively, scratch their eye or wipe their face along the carpet.


Ears
Your dog’s ears should be in their natural position and feel the same temperature as the rest of their body. Ensure there’s no swelling or lumps, and while some earwax is normal, the inside of their ear should be free from discharge, not red, crusty, or foul-smelling. If your dog has a problem with their ears they may also shake their head, scratch their ear, or hold their head to one side.


Nose
Inspect your dog's nose and check that both nostrils open and close naturally while sniffing. Their nose should be moist and free of discharge or excessive crusting. While examining, watch for signs of flinching, whining, growling, or barking, which could indicate discomfort or pain.

Mouth and teeth
Your dog’s jaw should open and close easily, allowing them to eat without trouble. Excessive drooling or pawing at the mouth is a sign that something is wrong.

Look at their tongue and gums which should appear moist and shiny. Their gums should be a healthy pink colour, not bright red, pale, grey, or white.

Finally, check your dog's teeth. They shouldn't be broken or wobbly. Remember, plaque and tartar can build up, so follow your vet's advice to avoid dental disease. If you do notice a build-up of tartar, seek advice from your vet. Bad breath can also be a sign that something could be wrong and needs checking by your vet.


Body
Gently run your hands over your dog's body, ensuring both sides feel the same and are symmetrical. Check that each shoulder is the same size and shape and that your dog’s body temperature feels even over their body with no hot areas.

Look at your dog from above, you should be able to see their waist, and their back should be straight. Your dog's ribs should be easy to feel beneath their coat, although these might not be visible through their fur. Being able to feel their ribs and see their waist is a sign that your dog is at a healthy weight.

Watch your dog's chest as it rises and falls while breathing. Their breathing should be regular and rhythmic, and they should breathe comfortably without any signs of difficulty or wheezing.


Coat and skin
Inspect your dog's skin and coat for the following:

Cuts and grazes: Look for any signs of broken skin, like cuts or grazes. These should be cleaned and may require medical attention. 

Parasites: Check for ticks, mites, lice, and fleas. Keep an eye out for flea dirt, which can appear as black specks in their fur, that turn reddish-brown when wet.

Abnormalities: Examine for lumps, spots, or any patches of hair loss. Look for signs of itchiness, redness, or thickening of the skin beneath their fur. 

Matted fur and moist areas: Clumps of fur or moist areas on the skin could be a sign of poor grooming or another issue, you should see your vet to understand the cause. 

Dry skin and dandruff: Check your dog’s skin for dryness and their coat for dandruff. These could be signs of poor nutrition so you should speak to your vet if you notice either of these.


Legs and paws
Gently feel your dog's legs in turn and then move onto their paws. Lift each leg in the direction it bends naturally to avoid causing discomfort to your dog. Make sure you:

Check for any areas that feel swollen or warmer than the rest

Examine for matted fur or any foreign objects stuck in their paw pads, like grass seeds or splinters

Inspect their legs and paw pads for any signs of grazing or cuts

Examine their nails for any damage or overgrowth


Tail
Your dog's tail should be held in a natural relaxed position and move easily. You should check for any areas of damage, swelling, hair loss or chewing. Be gentle with your dog's tail, it is a highly sensitive area of the body.


Genitals and anus

Finally, inspect your dog's genitals, which should generally appear clean and without swelling or redness unless your female dog is in season. During this period, you may notice some vulval swelling and a bit of bloody discharge. This is normal, but if anything seems unusual for your dog speak to your vet.

Look for signs of irritation, itchiness, or any unusual lumps or hardened areas in this region. If your dog is persistently chewing at their bottom, it's a good idea to seek advice from your vet.

Both male and female dogs have nipples, typically arranged in two rows across their chest and abdominal area, totalling around ten. These nipples shouldn’t exhibit any lumps, redness, discharge or swelling.

Reading your dog's body language during a health check
Dogs communicate their feelings through their body language, so always pay attention to their cues during their health check. If they show signs of distress or discomfort, such as lip-licking or turning away from you, take a break to make sure your dog feels happy and positive about health checks.

A vet and vet nurse perform a physical check on a dog.
What are common health conditions to look out for?
There are many common health conditions that your dog may suffer from at some point in their life. By being aware of these conditions, you’re more likely to spot symptoms or anything unusual during their health check and in everyday life.

Fleas and ticks
Worms
Obesity and carrying excess weight
Vomiting and diarrhoea
Ear, eye, and skin infections
Foreign objects like grass seeds in eyes, ears, nose, and pads
Paw pad damage and overgrown nails