Dogs and hot weather
The summer can bring us days of sunshine and soaring temperatures. On warm, humid days it's important you're aware of the effects that the higher temperature can have on your dog.

A guide dog sits on a beach, looking toward the water, between two guide dog owners.

What weather is too hot for dogs?
You need to be aware of the effects of heat at cooler temperatures than you might expect. Temperatures over just 20 degrees Celsius can start to have an impact on your dog, and when the mercury reaches 25 degrees, greater care should be taken to prevent your dog getting too hot and risking heatstroke. Individual dogs, and different breeds, will respond differently to the heat. Their response can differ due to age, fitness, health and how used they are to the conditions, but all dogs rely on us to protect them from the effects of the sun.

How hot weather affects dogs 
Dogs aren't aware of the dangers that the heat can bring and need you to keep them safe and protected from the impact of hot weather.

When we’re hot, we sweat to expel excess heat. Dogs, however, only perspire around their paws, so to cool down, they pant. This enables them to take air through their nasal passages, picking up excess heat from the body, which is then expelled through the mouth. The ability to do this is severely affected in high humidity or when the dog is confined, for example in a car.

Can dogs get sunburnt?
It’s a common misconception that dogs don’t get sunburnt, due to their hair or fur. While this is partly true, it’s possible for your dog to get burned on exposed areas of skin, such as their nose, lips, or tummy. Breeds with lighter or shorter fur are more at risk of burning, as their skin is more exposed to the sun.

To help prevent this, ensure your dog has access to cool, shady areas, and prevent them from lying in the sun for extended periods of time. If you notice your dog’s skin getting pink or red, move them indoors and apply a cold, damp towel to the affected area for 20 minutes.


Remember - monitor your dog closely, particularly if they're older, overweight, or they suffer from breathing difficulties.


Dogs in cars
Even on a mild day, with the windows open, the temperature inside a car can reach around 49 degrees Celsius in less than 30 minutes. The high humidity, combined with the enclosed space, can dramatically increase the risk of heatstroke – which can quickly become fatal for your dog. 

Heat exhaustion and heatstroke
Heat exhaustion can rapidly progress to heatstroke and become an emergency situation. Be aware of the following signs: 

Excessive panting 
Your dog becoming uncomfortable
Lack of response to cues 
Rapid heartbeat 
High fever 
Possible vomiting and diarrhoea
Collapse 
If you think your dog has heatstroke you must act quickly and calmly. If possible, move your dog to a cool, shaded area. If your dog is having difficulty breathing, ensure their airways are clear. Your dog’s temperature needs to be reduced gradually. This can be done by applying towels soaked in cool water, ensuring that they cover the hairless areas (groin and feet) as these areas are sensitive to heat - this will help reduce your dog’s temperature. Once your dog is stabilised, seek veterinary advice immediately. Be sure to cool your dog down gradually, as doing this too quickly could cause a rapid shift in body temperature. 

Hot pavements and artificial grass 
Dogs’ paw pads are covered with hard layers, but they can still suffer burns to their feet. Artificial grass is becoming more popular; however, it’s important to be mindful that it’s often made of plastic, and under bright sunshine it heats up very quickly which risks burning dogs’ paws. Remember, Tarmac, concrete, and pavement surfaces can become dangerously hot on sunny days and retain the heat later into the evening. You can test the temperature of the ground by carefully checking it with the back of your hand for around five seconds - if it’s too hot for your hand, it’s too hot for your dog’s paws!

Swimming
Many dogs love swimming, particularly in the warmer months, but it’s important to be careful in the hot weather:

Keep your dog out of stagnant water because of the risk of blue-green algae ‘blooming’ in the hot weather – gently flowing streams are a much better option for a paddle at this time of year 
Always be aware of currents in the water source and make sure your dog can and will come back if called 
If exercising on the beach, ensure dogs do not drink salt water which could make them sick. Wash salt and sand off your dog’s coat after swimming to prevent it drying and irritating their skin
Learn more about seasonal dangers outdoors. 


Food
Your dog's appetite and digestion may be affected by the warmer weather. The higher temperatures could make your dog less hungry, as they may be less active during the daytime. 

Try offering your dog food at cooler times of the day. Remember to never leave your dog's food out for long durations, as heat and humidity can cause dog food – both dry and wet – to go rancid.

If your dog is losing weight rapidly, hasn’t eaten in 24 hours, or has stopped drinking their water, you should contact your vet immediately. 

Walking your dog in hot weather
Dogs need their exercise, but on warm days they can overheat easily – and heatstroke in dogs can become dangerous very quickly. In warmer weather: 

Walk your dog in the cool of the morning or the evening
Always watch your dog carefully and if they seem to be panting excessively slow everything down – remember, they sometimes don’t know when to stop
Take a break, and maybe try again at a cooler time of day
It's important for your dog to readily have access to water at all times of the day - take a supply with you if you go out
 If it’s too warm to safely exercise your dog outside, keep your dog busy at home with puzzles and games – exercise their brain rather than their body for a day or two!
Tips for keeping your dog cool in hot weather 
You can help your dog safely enjoy warmer temperatures by following our tips:

Create a cool space in your house by picking the coolest area of your home, and if possible, provide a cooling mat or cold damp towel for your dog to lie on
Like us, many dogs enjoy a cold treat on a hot day, and if your dog is rested, relatively cool, and calm, they can have a chilled or cooled treat. However, you should avoid giving very cold food to an over-heated or recently exercised dog, as they need to cool down gradually
Ensure your dog is well groomed to remove any excess hair. This will allow your dog’s skin to breathe and trap less heat in their coat
Keep your dog's water bowl topped with clean, fresh water. You may wish to place additional water bowls, such as one outdoors, to ensure your dog stays hydrated